# The Goal
This software provides the user the ability to track the internet speed and visualize it on a graph using NodeJS and Python.
By building the applications into binaries, it allows you to execute this code on any Windows machine.

# Speedtest
The speedtest application is using NodeJS as the engine with a few libraries to assist with tracking the internet speed.
### Installing NodeJS
To install NodeJS you can download it from here: [nodejs.org/en/download](https://nodejs.org/en/download/)

### Libraries
The primary library that we are using is **fast-speedtest-api** which can be installed after you have completed the NodeJS installation.
Simply run `npm i fast-speedtest-api` to download the library to your local application.
You can also run `npm i --global fast-speedtest-api` if you want to install the library for all applications.

### Logic
When the speedtest application is run, it will do one test against Fast.com which is hosted by Netflix.
The download speed results is then written to a json file formatted to match that day's date.
If you want to setup a system that will periodically run this application, you can either use [Jenkins](https://www.jenkins.io) or [Windows Tasks](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/taskschd/task-scheduler-start-page).
Most computers support Windows Tasks, but not all support Jenkins.

### Building the Application
Building the application is rather unreliable, but possible.
The software I use to build is called `nexe` and is available on [github.com/nexe](https://github.com/nexe/nexe)
If you have any issues running the Build.bat file, please run it from command prompt then install the required packages it suggests.

The Build.bat file simply runs the following command:
`nexe SpeedTest.js --build --verbose`
Any issues will present itself when run from Command Prompt.

It will then finally compile the code into a **SpeedTest.exe** application.

# Data Visualizer
To be honest, this is not the best application I have ever written as it is slow and difficult to maintain.
However, it does get the job done with the following available abilities:
 - Plot the speed graph of the selected file(s)
 - Calculate the standard deviation (accuracy) of the overall data.
 - Calculate the average
 - Align all data onto one graph and timeframe.
 - Load in multiple json data files, generated by the Speedtest application.
 - Run the application without selecting a file (Requires the data files to be in the same folder)

The application is written in python using `matplotlib` as it's plotting application.

### Installing Python
You can install the latest Python binaries by visiting [python.org/downloads](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
This should also include a [Package Installer for Python](https://pypi.org/project/pip/) called `pip`
Once python is installed, you can use **pip** to install `matplotlib`:
```
pip install matplotlib
```
### Logic
This application takes in arguments either from the CLI or by dragging the files over the executable.
If no arguments is provided, it will search for the latest available JSON file in the folder and use that.
The data is loaded from the file and used for calculating variables such as the overall average, standard deviation, S1-S3 (Ranges) and cleaning up data.
 - S1: This bracket tells us that around 68% of all data can be found within this bracket.
 - S2: About 95% of all data can be found within this bracket.
 - S3: Around 99.7% of all data can be found within this bracket.

At least according to Google...
This means, that the smaller the Standard Deviation is, the more stable the network is. However if the Standard Deviation is large, the network is rather unstable.

### Building the Application
The builder is using `pyinstaller` which should be installed by running `pip install pyinstaller`
The `Build.bat` file contains the following code:
```
set hour=%time:~0,2%
if "%hour:~0,1%" == " " set hour=0%hour:~1,1%
set min=%time:~3,2%
if "%min:~0,1%" == " " set min=0%min:~1,1%
set secs=%time:~6,2%
if "%secs:~0,1%" == " " set secs=0%secs:~1,1%
set year=%date:~-2%
set month=%date:~4,2%
if "%month:~0,1%" == " " set month=0%month:~1,1%
set day=%date:~7,2%
if "%day:~0,1%" == " " set day=0%day:~1,1%
set datetimef=%day%%month%%year%_%hour%%min%%secs%
pyinstaller --noconfirm --onefile --windowed "show_graph.py" -n "ShowGraph_%datetimef%"
```
A quick breakdown of the code is as follows:
We are splitting the current date and time into different variables to get the format: `ShowGraph_ddMMyyyy_hhmmss.exe`
Then we are using that format to be our output file name.
You can read more on the documentation here at [pyinstaller's home page](https://pyinstaller.org/en/stable/)
Running this code will finally give you an executable file which you can run on any page.

# Other Information
When compiling these applications into binaries, the executable is backwards compatible and can be run on older and newer versions of Windows, such as Windows 8, 8.1, 10 and 11.
This project is developed with the intention of helping the user visualize the internet speeds that they are using, as well as assisting consultants with debugging any network issues over a period of time.
